In this video I'm going to show you how to identify the maximum points and the minimum points of a function.
Those are also called maxima and minima in plural and together these are called the extreme.
So the extreme points of a function.
So basically here's what that looks like.
Imagine you have some graphs some function that looks like this or maybe it looks like this.
And what we want to do is identify the maximum so the largest point and the minimum which is the smallest
point.
All right.
So let's switch to Python and just immediately dive right in.
I'm going to be using some functions in the known pi module and then I'm also going to be doing some
plotting some importing the matte plot lib pi plot module.
So before getting to the interesting mathematical functions I want to show you how to identify the Maxima
and minimum of a list of numbers.
So start by creating a list.
So let's say about minus four and five point five.
And just go for one in three that I say three I meant to say two.
So the question is what is the maximum in this list.
What is the largest value in this list.
Now obviously you just look at these numbers and you can see that it's 5.5 but we need a better way
a more algorithmic way to identify the maximum.
And that's because you might have a really really long list of numbers maybe you have a list of numbers
that's imported from a dataset or generated from some mathematical function.
So it's not really sufficient or it's not scalable just to look at this thing and determine what the
maximum is.
So we can find the maximum using the NUM pi function Max.
So you just input the list or the array the variable and that tells you what the largest value is.
So no big surprise there.
I'm gonna set the output of this to be a variable called Max Val.
Okay.
But now the question is where is this maximum value located.
Now obviously you know what this little toy example you can just look at it and you can say well it's
the second number.
So it's index number one.
However if you would try to write list Max Val this is going to produce an error and the error says
that list indices must be integers or slices and that's actually pretty sensible because it is not possible
or doesn't even make sense to talk about the 5.5 ith element of this list.
So we need a way not only to identify the maximum value but also identify the location where that maximum
value occurs and to do that we use another function called end p dot ARG Max and the ARG is for argument
not argument like getting into a fight with someone but an argument is kind of an old school math term
for the output.
Okay.
So now ARG Max list tells us the number one.
So what does this mean.
Obviously this is not the maximum value.
Instead this is the index into this list where the maximum value is found.
So now I'm going to call this variable Max Val Ida X for index and now I can write list.
Max Val Ida X and this tells me that the element in the position Max Val Ida X is the maximum value.
All right.
So with that as a background let's move on to some interesting mathematical functions.
Oh and I didn't go through minimum but that's actually exactly the same you just type men and ARG men
instead of Max and arc Max.
Otherwise the concept is exactly the same.
All right.
So I'm going to make an interesting looking function.
I think it's interesting looking I hope you agree it is a cosigner.
The cosine of X plus the square root of x.
So what is x here.
Well let's define x to be linearly spaced numbers from 0 to 2 times pi and let's go for 20 points.
Okay.
And now I'm going to make a plot.
So BLT dot plot x by F of X and then show the plots.
All right.
Now the maximum of this function is actually located all the way up here it's the very last point.
I think that's slightly less interesting.
So what I'm going to do is actually flip this entire functions I'm going to say minus but not just minus
the cosine part minus the entire function.
So now we get this function and this is the maximum here.
So now let's identify the maximum value and the index at which that maximum value occurs.
So say I call this f Max Four function Max that equals num piled up Max function and F Max Ida X equals
num pi dot ARG Max F X okay.
And now before worrying about plotting I want to print these out just to make sure that we are getting
sensible results and not making any errors.
Okay.
So f Max is minus point seven and that seems pretty plausible based on the y axis here and F Max Ida
X is 9.
Now remember this is not the value here.
This is the value of X. This is the vector x that goes from 0 to 2 pi.
So 9 is telling us that it's the ninth index which is 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9.
So I guess at this point here.
All right.
So now what I want to do is plot a dot on that maximum value and actually first I want to make sure
that this is going to be.
Let's make this blue circles with lines connecting them.
Okay.
So then I'm gonna write P L T dot plot so the index f Max Ida X by the maximum value which is f Max
and let's make this a red square.
Now before I run this code I would like you to think about whether this is going to work or whether
it's not going to work now based on the fact that I even asked you that question.
You can probably guess that it's not going to work although it's not going to crash.
This is not an invalid line of code.
There's nothing wrong with this code in terms of pure coding but it's not going to give the right answer.
In fact it plots a dot all the way over here.
And what I've done wrong is I'm just plotting the index but really this is the index into the x axis
coordinate so x.
So in fact this has to be X and then the F Max idea axis index into the variable x.
All right.
And now that looks pretty good.
I see it was this point not this point because I was counting from one here in count instead of counting
from zero.
Typical mistake.
So now I'd like to go through one more example in this case using the minimum function.
So here I'm going to generate the function f of x to be a polynomial so this is going to be X cubed
plus X to the fourth power.
And now here I want X to be different.
X is not going to be in radians.
This is in radians because this is a trigonometric function here I'm gonna specify X to be.
Let's just go from minus to minus two to plus two in how about fifty one steps because 50 is a pretty
boring number.
So let's start by plotting this function P.L. teed up plot x by F of X again with blue circles.
And here is what that function looks like.
Now you don't really see where the minimum is right.
It looks like this function goes up on the left it goes up to the right and it just kind of generally
looks flat down here.
However there is an actual minimum in here it's just not visibly apparent when looking at the function
with this y axis scale.
So I'm going to change the scale to be able to zoom in here so P L T that X line let's change the excellent
to go from how about is going to be somewhere around here.
So let's go from minus one point to two.
Maybe I'll do How about zero.
All right so you still don't really see that there's a clear minimum point.
And again that's because of the y axis.
So let's also change the y axis BLT the X Lim.
And let's set that one from minus point to two plus point two.
Now you can see that there is a minimum here.
I'm going to stretch this out a little bit past zero about point five okay.
So this is starting to look pretty interesting now.
You can definitely see where the minimum point is it's over here and now you just have to be careful
with the interpretation because I cut off part of this graph.
So in fact this point here is not the zero one two three four fifth element or index number five because
there's a bunch of other points off here to the left.
All right.
And now just in the interest of variability I'm going to do this in a slightly different way so I'm
gonna plot the minimum point in a slightly different way from how I did it here up here.
I computed the maximum value and the maximum index here I'm only going to compute the maximum value.
Sorry the maximum index so F men Ida X equals num PI that ARG Min F X now a question is if I don't actually
extract the value using the main function how can I generate this plot.
How can I put a dot here on the minimum value.
So the way that I'm going to do that is by indexing not only on X. But also indexing on y indexing the
function so P L teed up plot.
So we want this is still going to be F by F of X and it's going to be a red square.
However we only want one specific point in X and that is f man Ida X and the exact same index of f of
x F men Ida X like this.
All right.
So that works and that looks pretty good.
And you know I think I'll even crop this a little bit lower just so it's even more apparent that this
is the real minimum.
So let's set this to be zero Mm mm mm.
Still looks like both of these are like competing for the smallest number.
How about minus point once times with these functions.
You really have to zoom in pretty closely.
Let's call this one point two.
Okay.
Now you really see when you zoom in super duper a lot you really see that this is definitely the minimum
point.
And with that as background knowledge you are now ready to complete the exercise for this video.
The exercise for this video is to implement this function minus the cosine of X minus the square root
of x in the domain.
So with the x values going from zero up to this looks like it's about thirty eight or so.
This turns out to be 12 pi if you want to reproduce this graph exactly.
You have to go up to 12 pi and then what you want to do is find each of these individual local peaks.
So previously I showed you how to find the global maximum.
That was just the one largest point of the function here.
You want to find all of the local maxima and the hint is that you use the function.
Find peaks.
Now that's actually not so much of a huge help for you because I didn't tell you or I'm not telling
you where to find the find peaks function.
So it's in some modules somewhere you have to figure that out.
And I'm also not going to tell you how to use this function you have to figure that out as well.
All right so pause the video.
Figure out how to use the fine peaks function and reproduce this plot based on this function.
And now I'm going to switch to Python and I will show you how I solved this.
You have probably discovered that the find peaks function is located in the CI pi signal module.
So from side by signal import the find peaks function.
All right.
So let's start by specifying the X range.
So that's num pi.
Lynn space 0 2 12 times pi.
And let's go How about two hundred and eleven.
Now let's go for two hundred and thirteen linearly spaced steps between 0 and 12 pi.
So then the function is going to be minus cosine of X minus the square root of x.
All right.
So before worrying about this fine peaks business I'm going to generate a plot just to make sure that
I haven't made any errors and I'm getting the right answer so far.
Visualization of data and in particular mathematical functions is super important.
The importance cannot be underestimated.
All right.
So this is looking good it looks like the function that I showed in these slides.
So now let's have a look at this fine peaks function.
So I'm gonna call his output variable peaks.
A misspelling peaks intentionally peaks equals find peaks of X and I want I want to do is print out
peaks to see what this thing looks like.
Okay.
So it's empty.
But that's because there are no local peaks within X but that's actually because that was a stupid little
mistake.
So it's really f of x where we're looking for peaks.
So it looks like this variable peaks is a tuple so you can see the parentheses here and there's two
items in here one is an array and this looks like it could be the indices of the maximum values x.
Clearly not the maximum values themselves because all of the or the entire function is negative.
And then there is a second element here which is just empty it's a dictionary and it turns out that
it's empty.
Now you could put the cursor inside the parentheses here and press shift tab on the keyboard and get
more information about this function.
Now of course as always I encourage you after this video to spend some time going through this function
if you plan on using something like find peaks you can see what are the properties of this dictionary.
So this is the second output and that basically provides a bunch of information based on some additional
inputs that you are allowed to specify.
So there are many additional inputs that you can specify into this function.
And I'm not so I'm basically leaving everything at the default settings.
Okay so what that actually means is that the peaks themselves are not in the variable peaks they are
in fact in the first element of the variable peaks like this.
So we have to access peaks and then the zero f or the first element.
All right.
So let's do that.
So BLT dot plot.
So then again I want to plot f r x by F of X and this should be a circle.
And now instead of accessing all of the elements and X we just want peaks and then the zero so the first
element from the variable peaks the output of the fine peaks function and then I'll just copy and paste
this here.
Oh right.
So that's pretty cool.
We've identified all of the local maxima of this function in this video you learned about maxima and
minima you learned how to identify maxima and minima using these functions Max an arc max and min and
Armin and you learned about this function find peaks which is in the spy module.